[OSDOCS#18859]: Added files for Degraded TNF (#110945)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/prohibited-operations-during-degraded-tnf-operation.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// * installing_tnf/operating-degraded-two-node-fencing-cluster.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT
[id="prohibited-operations-during-degraded-tnf-operation_{context}"]
= Prohibited operations during degraded TNF operation

[role="_abstract"]

> You should not perform certain administrative operations while a Two-Node with Fencing (TNF) cluster is in a degraded state. Attempting these operations can leave the cluster in a state that is more difficult to recover from than the original degraded state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must not perform certain administrative operations while a Two-Node with Fencing (TNF) cluster is in a degraded state. Attempting these operations can leave the cluster in a state that is more difficult to recover from than the original degraded state.
```

+
As a result, a new signer CA may be created, but downstream certificates such as peer, serving, and client certificates are not regenerated by using the new CA. The cluster appears to have partially rotated, but the rotation is incomplete.

[WARNING]
====
Do not delete the etcd signer secret while the cluster is degraded. Doing so triggers a new CA creation, but the downstream certificates cannot be regenerated. The `kube-apiserver` eventually loses trust in etcd, resulting in permanent control plane failure that cannot be recovered.
====

Certificate validity operations::
Individual leaf certificate regeneration, for example an etcd serving certificate for the surviving node, does work during degraded operation because it uses the existing signer rather than a new one.
+
Existing etcd certificates remain valid during degraded operation. Certificate validity periods are approximately five years for peer, serving certificates, and signer CA.

MachineConfig updates::

> MachineConfig changes that require a node reboot are not applied during degraded operation. The primary `MachineConfigPool` has a `maxUnavailable` setting, which defaults to `1`. The unavailable node already counts against this budget. Because the budget is fully consumed, the Machine Config Operator does not proceed with updates that might require draining and rebooting the surviving node. New `MachineConfig` resources are accepted, but the `MachineConfigPool` does not progress.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what _the `MachineConfigPool` does not progress_ means. I took a guess here. Also, what is the _primary `MachineConfigPool`_? Is that a two node term?
```suggestion
Machine configuration updates::
Machine configuration changes that require a node reboot are not applied during degraded operation. The primary machine config pool has a `maxUnavailable` setting, which defaults to `1`. The unavailable node already counts against this budget. Because the budget is fully consumed, the Machine Config Operator does not proceed with updates that might require draining and rebooting the surviving node. New `MachineConfig` resources are accepted, but the `MachineConfigPool` update does not progress.
```

+

> Queued `MachineConfig` changes are applied after the second node is restored and the cluster exits degraded mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Queued machine configuration changes are applied after the second node is restored and the cluster exits degraded mode.
```

Author: `MachineConfig` object

PodDisruptionBudget (PDB) enforcement::

> `PodDisruptionBudget` (PDB) enforcement continues during degraded operation. Eviction requests that might violate `minAvailable` or `maxUnavailable` policies are rejected. Administrative operations involving pod eviction, such as node drains, might be blocked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pod disruption budget enforcement::
Pod disruption budget (PDB) enforcement continues during degraded operation. Eviction requests that might violate `minAvailable` or `maxUnavailable` policies are rejected. Administrative operations involving pod eviction, such as node drains, might be blocked.
```

* Do not initiate any upgrade before restoring the second node. If you cannot restore the second node, replace it.

* Do not initiate etcd certificate authority (CA) rotation while the cluster is degraded.
+
etcd CA rotation requires distributing new trust bundles to both control-plane nodes and converging a new static pod revision on each. With one node down, bundle distribution cannot complete and the revision cannot advance. 
+
As a result, new signer CA may be created, but downstream certificates such as peer, serving, and client certificates are not regenerated by using the new CA.

* The cluster appears to have partially rotated, but the rotation is incomplete.

[WARNING]
====
Do not delete the etcd signer secret while the cluster is degraded. Doing so triggers a new CA creation, but the downstream certificates cannot be regenerated. The `kube-apiserver` will eventually lose trust in etcd, resulting in permanent control-plane failure that cannot be recovered.
====

* Individual leaf certificate regeneration, for example an etcd serving certificate for the surviving node, does work during degraded operation because it uses the existing signer rather than a new one.

> * Existing etcd certificates remain valid during degraded operation. Certificate validity periods are approximately three years for peer and serving certificates, and approximately five years for the signer CA.

Reviewer 3: Verified on a live 4.23 cluster — peer, serving, and signer CA certificates are all ~5 years (notAfter=2031 from a 2026 install). The "three years for peer and serving" figure doesn't match current behavior. All three are approximately five years.
